did you know there's a really
fascinating experiment done on weight
lifters they lifted no weights for two
weeks they just sat there and they
visualized themselves lifting weights
they had a 13 increase in muscle mass
people should realize how much potential
they have in their brains Dr Tara SWAT
she's a neuroscientist medical doctor
executive advisor and best-selling
author she's here to teach us on how to
build mental resilience to overcome our
biggest challenges
is stress contagious so cortisol is the
main stress hormone and it will leak out
of our sweat about this far around us go
into the skin of everybody else and it's
going to impact them
and as a survival mechanism it will help
you to store fat around your abdomen so
stress causes belly fat belly fat that's
really hard to shift there's another
Rabbit Hole you could go down about
social contagion so there are statistics
that show that you meet people who are
at a similar psychological level to you
for example if someone gets divorced
you're more likely to get divorced in
the next year growing brain can play
tricks on you so what can I do about
that the brain is actively growing and
changing till we're about 25.
but from 25 to 65. if you do things that
are intense enough to force your brain
to change you will actually improve the
highest functions of the brain things
like regulate your emotions better solve
complex problems think flexibly override
any unconscious biases that you may have
it begs the question then
where do I start
[Music]
Ed
SWAT what are the sort of existing ideas
that your work and what you speak about
is confronting the like unhelpful
existing preconceptions about the brain
human potential that your work is
confronting head on so the first thing I
came up against because this was around
the time of the financial crisis was the
lack of understanding of the brain Body
Connection
so these high performing Executives were
kind of acting like
their body was just the vehicle that was
moving their brain around from meeting
to meeting and both
disrespecting their
physical health but also not
understanding that what they're actually
really being paid for was to use their
brain and they weren't creating the best
conditions for that brain to operate in
and I'm talking about really basic
things like sleep and a good diet and
hydration and not being sedentary
managing your stress Etc
so you know this tiny organ
if it's not in an environment that is
giving it the best chance of doing its
job it's not going to and a crack's
going to appear somewhere
um and the first time I really kind of
had a big confrontation with a bank was
when people were dropping dead on the
trading floor of heart attacks
and they
asked me to work more in my capacity as
a former medical doctor to help with
physical stuff
and I said I can't do that if we don't
address the mental and emotional peace
because that's what's causing this
and they just could could not get that
what did you want to do with those
people in a specific and practical sense
what if you could have you know been in
charge of
preventing them from dropping down on
the trading floor where would you have
started the understanding that stress
so everything that you're experiencing
mentally and emotionally that's
challenging and things like a lot of
travel which is challenging of your body
that that raises levels of the hormone
cortisol which comes from your adrenal
glands
and that cortisol courses around your
blood through your entire body and brain
and the brain has receptors
for understanding what's going on in
terms of threat to your survival
so in a 24-hour cycle depending on your
age and your gender there's a normal
range for cortisol so it can go up and
down like this you know something
challenging happens we need to adapt and
rise to meet that challenge but when
that level is above the top range all
the time these receptors in your brain
basically think that there's an imminent
threat to your survival
so there's this whole Cascade of
hormones
and they're basically cortisol causes
inflammation in the body so inflammation
of your vascular system inflammation
around your heart
and everything else Gart and you know
other things but
particularly around that time we were
seeing a lot of heart attacks caused by
stress this was in the absence of high
blood pressure high cholesterol smoking
it was all stress
I read a I read a study and I was
watching a TED Talk that seemed to make
the case that stress was somewhat
subjective I.E it's an interpretation of
events so one can be in a situation
where they feel very stressed you can
put a different person in that situation
and they wouldn't experience it as
stress also there is I think there's
quite famous Ted Talk that makes the
case that
stress only has physiological
consequences in the form of disease and
inflammation and the heart attacks
you're describing
if we believe
that stress is going to have that effect
on us if we believe stress is bad it's
bad yeah I get that is that true
um
so I would Define stress as when the
load that you perceive on you physically
mentally emotionally or spiritually is
too much for you to bear so yes it is
subjective
um when I moved into business and
Leadership people would use the terms
good stress and bad stress and I found
that really difficult having been a
psychiatrist and seeing people actually
break down
to think that there's any such thing as
good stress but what I have you know the
way that I've adapted that over the last
10 or 15 years is that there's an
Adaptive response which is a healthy
response to a challenge and we have that
for a reason we need that and that can
be a good thing but that should be a
spike it should go up and it should go
back down again if it stays high all the
time
that's not good
my second question now is about the
contagion of stress once upon a time I
Googled
um because I had a thesis I Googled is
stress contagious
came up and it said it was contagious
or is it contagious in what
circumstances do we need to be aware of
that contagion and more importantly how
and why is it contagious okay I will
tell you the answer to that but I'm
going to ask you a question first
have you ever walked into a room with
someone and by the time you've left that
meeting with them you just feel so
drained
okay so of course yeah yeah you know so
you know the feeling so I'll tell you
how it works physiologically
um I'm going to start with something
else to like build you up to this story
so did you know that women who live
together or work closely together will
synchronize their menstrual periods
within two or three months yeah I found
this out many years ago and it has
completely changed my perception on so
many things
so many things because
I have to be honest I'm a very sort of
logical I need like science and evidence
and so I always thought about
I don't know physical things like if I
can't see it it doesn't exist yeah it's
going to be my framework for thinking
about life yeah and when I heard about
that I checked it was true found out it
was true and it broke the frame in which
I think because if if there are if it's
possible that invisible forces now
between me and you are interacting with
our bodies okay what else is possible
I'm already using a certain form of eye
contact with you to create emotional
resonance oh what have you done we're
going to get sidetracked you want to go
back to the home eye contact are you
using with me
so basically we'll go back to the
hormone thing yeah we'll park that it's
it's related
um so when a baby is born
one of the ways that it learns what
emotion the mum's experiencing how it
understands its own emotions you know
everything that grows over childhood and
teenage into
you know pro-social Behavior
starts off mostly with eye contact with
the mum so at first they can hardly see
anything they can just kind of see two
blobs and then they start to understand
more about like micro facial expression
changes and stuff but eye contact with
the mom is hugely important
so most people are right-handed so
they'll be holding their baby in their
left arm so they can still use their
dominant hand to do stuff
and that means that when you gaze at
your baby
your right eye is looking into their
left eye
and then that interaction that from the
optic nerve is going around the brain
it's impacting the um amygdala where
emotions come from and it's creating
this emotional resonance Loop that's
part of how the mother and the baby Bond
so that right eye to left eye eye
contact has the most bonding eye contact
that you can have with someone now you
could say oh but my mom was left-handed
or you could be left-handed but you know
if I'm taking a chance on trying to
build that bond with someone that's the
statistically most likely one to create
good resonance between you so you walked
in here and you started looking in my
left eye I waited till we sat down
I gave you a hug you give me a hug you
know so all of those little things they
start to
and you know we've laughed about a few
things before we've come on air those
are the sorts of things that create like
um higher levels of the bonding hormone
oxytocin so you're more likely to lower
your guard trust the person take a
healthy risk
um
so yeah I mean like I said I know that
stuff so I live my life like that
just want to get make sure I've got that
clearly in my mind so I could repeat
that to someone else
later it's great for dating yeah of
course it is I think we might go down
that down that path a little bit but the
reason that works is because there's a
Association in our brains that if
someone is looking into your left eye it
kind of triggers something a bonding
response that is quite innate in US yeah
okay super interesting what else
what else if I'm trying to bond with
someone yeah so everybody listening to
this right now whether they're in work
they're in sales they they're looking
for a partner whatever it's a nice
little trick to look into someone's left
eye I'm gonna only look into your left
eye for the rest with your right eye
how do I I'm just looking with both
yeah you feel like that but once you
start doing this I promise you you will
notice a difference okay
um what else what are the tricks to make
to encourage bonding encourage bonding
So Physical interaction so
um you know depending on the
appropriateness of it minimum handshake
may be a hug maybe a kiss on the cheek
you know depending on what
um situation you're in I do this
handshake where I we hugged so we didn't
hand shake them I many many years ago I
read an article that if when you shake
someone's hand you put the other hand
over the top of it it creates a sense of
warmth and Trust so I've been doing that
for 10 years now give them my left hand
or my right hand and then the other hand
goes over the top of it yeah
and you see this in a lot of um kind of
more ancient cultures that there is like
more of a handshake than what we do
which seems it's just one hand and it's
quite brief and stuff so yeah the more
of that kind of physical touch that you
can get the best so you know everyone
that I've met since I've come in this
morning I've either shaken hands with
them or hugged them and I would not not
do that
is there anything else in terms of
encouraging the release of oxytocin
that you're aware of what are the
behaviors that increase that bonding
chemical in our brains
um eye contact and touch are the main
ones laughing together is another one
um and then
not to do with another person but if you
take a bath rather than a shower then
you'll release more oxytocin
massage helps well you're immersed in
warm water so it feels like a hug
so you'd theoretically get out of the
bath and
and Kinder and happier and
more people would want to bond with you
more well you'll be more in the mode of
wondering doing that yeah
so interesting what about vulnerability
because I I heard shared struggle is one
of the things that releases oxytocin
yeah so um yeah going through something
not necessarily traumatic but that's
highly emotional that is very bonding as
well so we see this a lot on the reality
shows where people are like oh we're
going to be friends for life you know if
you do something like a skydiver a
bungee jump in a group then you know you
do feel more bonded to those people
um but they're not as practical as the
just the little things that you can do
every day okay so let's go back to this
hormone conversation we'll take that off
the shelf so we're talking about stress
and the contagion of stress
so you started by setting the scene with
the fact that women who interact with
each other physically closely they
synchronize their menstrual cycles and
so whenever I want to explain something
that's complex or I don't actually know
the current Neuroscience I always take
it back to
what happened in ancient times
so when we were living in the cave
the men hunted and gathered and lived
quite nomadically so sometimes they
would go away for months at a time and
actually if they went far enough away
and were closer to another Cave of the
same tribe they would actually just stay
there and never return to the original
Drive original cave but mostly they
would leave for weeks or months and then
return to the original cave
and in those days the most fundamental
important thing for the survival of the
human species was that the alpha male
must pass on his genes
so if he was going to be away for months
and he couldn't you know that there
weren't men there to defend the women
from predators maybe there was going to
be a spell of the Ice Age and they would
all freeze to death or
they wouldn't have food
um
he needed to make sure that at least
five women were impregnated with his
sperm at the same time so that if there
was a food shortage or there was like
still birth or miscarriage or whatever
at least one out of five would survive
so to be able to do that they had to be
fertile at the same time so that's why
that mechanism exists
now we don't need that mechanism now but
it's still wired into the way that we
operate so those sex steroid hormones
like estrogen and progesterone
they leak out of our sweat about this
far around us and that's why if you're
living with another woman or if you know
you're sitting across the desk every day
then particles of hormone from my sweat
would go into the
through the skin of the other woman if
she's within what distance I mean it's
not you wouldn't have to be sitting next
to each other if you lived together then
that means you're interacting enough
that it would happen okay
so particles not if you work together if
you work together and you sit right next
to each other every day then it does
happen too so you know in a a small
office that's got like six girls in it
that the menstrual synchronization will
happen interestingly it's led by the
alpha female so yeah
so you can you can work out if you don't
know already who the alpha female well
if you know basically let's say My
Cycles don't change and everyone says oh
I've got my period early or I haven't
had my period yet but now it started
then that would mean that probably I was
the alpha female
how does the body know who the alpha
female is
that will be to do with levels of
testosterone why why did the body why
does that matter who the alpha female is
why does it matter that they sync up
with her I I don't I don't know if it
really matters I think it's just a case
of physiology so it's a little bit like
in the um
troops of gorillas
the stress levels of the silverback
gorilla affect the other gorillas more
than gorillas who appears to each other
so there is we have a natural hierarchy
and it must be related to survival as
well
so she was probably the person who the
alpha male was going to impregnate first
probably so everyone needs to kind of
fall in line because when she starts
having sex they need to be ready yeah
okay and also it'll probably be to do
with things like you know survival jeans
so it'll be the people with the hardiest
genes because that's what you'll want to
pass on as well okay makes sense most
resilient okay
okay so where were we stressing
contagion all the hormones in the
menstrual cycle so basically cortisol is
a hormone that works in that same way so
cortisol is the main stress hormone and
this one doesn't matter if you're male
or female but it does matter where you
are in the hierarchy of the organization
as I just mentioned
so
usually in that conversation I mentioned
to you where you go into a room and you
just feel completely drained afterwards
usually the person that comes out
feeling drained is less senior than the
person that's had that effect on them
and that's why this is so crucial to
leadership
because your stress levels as a leader
as a CEO are going to have more impact
on everybody else than the rest of the
people put together basically so
managing your stress is obviously
important for you
but it's important in terms of what
happens to other people and the first
issue I came up against was
CEOs and CFOs that said well
I won't show them that I'm stressed I
won't I won't tell them what's happening
with the numbers I won't
display emotions in front of them and I
said they're still going to know
physiologically it's going to impact
them
so now you really have to do something
about it
um
and the other thing about cortisol which
is quite funny
well one of the side effects is quite
funny is that as a survival mechanism it
will help you to store fat around your
abdomen
so you know again in the cave if you
were potentially going to like not find
food for a month than if you had extra
fat around your abdomen you could digest
that and survive till you could find
food
so with my clients in financial services
it got to a point where as soon as I
walked into the room they just lift
their t-shirt up and say now you know
how I've been in the last month
and then I had a really really funny
incident when I was speaking at a bank
and the CEOs
PA was there in the audience
and I was explaining that you know
leadership stress leaks down that that
stress can lead to abdominal fat that
you can't shift and she shouted out so
he's the reason that I'm fat
but Steve no one laughed really yeah
and that's when I knew that okay he
obviously is like really stressing
everyone out
oh gosh no one lost no
through fear or something or just
because they all just thought it was
true it wasn't funny it was true Jesus
so stress causes belly fat
belly fat that's really hard to shift so
again what I would see with people is
that they would say oh I've put on a bit
of weight around the middle you know how
to do something about a bit so I've
started eating less I've started like
exercising more and I still can't shift
it and again that's when I would explain
this is the impact of cortisol as long
as you're still leaking out extra
cortisol nothing's going to change so
and like I said even exercising more or
eating better
less or differently whatever it is
wouldn't shift that fat you had to get
to the root cause you had to reduce the
cortisol
it also made me think about when you
consider promoting someone in your
organization you have to be very careful
that if you put a particularly stressed
cortisol leaking individual high in the
organization there's going to be
a significant impact for everyone below
them yeah is that accurate is that an
accurate yeah yeah no that's a really
good way of putting it I mean I always
think of that phrase what got you here
won't get you there which is more about
the fact that people get promoted
because they're good at what they do but
they don't really get taught all the you
know best management and Leadership
skills but that's a really pertinent
point if there are
a person who is stressed particularly
who suppresses stress
um which some of these you know
successful people do then it would have
an impact down the organization it begs
the question then so if someone's
listening to this and they go do you
know what I'm a leaky cortisol person
I'm highly stressed and it's probably
getting to people around me what can I
do about that so first of all if
someone's saying that half the battle is
won the problem is when people are not
aware of that
um but let's say you are so let's say
that
I give you that list of signs and
symptoms that you've got high levels of
cortisol which include things like sleep
disruption because cortisol is part of
the 24-hour clock melatonin helps us to
wake up cortisol helps
melatonin helps us to fall asleep
cortisol helps us to wake up
um maybe you've noticed the belly fat
um because of the really strong
connection between the brain and the gut
any sort of reflux or indigestion
symptoms are often signs that you've got
high levels of cortisol too and of
course things like irritability and mood
changes what I mostly would hear people
say is that I can just about keep it
together when I'm at work but when I get
home if my kids are you know Annoying or
my partner's asking for too much I just
snap so that means you're like one step
away from snapping at work if somebody
like pushes you too far so that's not
good because cortisol is
pro-inflammatory it's very drying of the
system as well so you might notice that
your Skin's really dry or you've got
skin problems your skin isn't just the
physical border of your body it's the
psychological boundary of your body too
so often stress shows up in the skin
then
there are two main things that you can
do
one is physical exercise because you can
literally sweat cortisol out of your
body so you can sweat Excel excess
cortisol out of your body by doing
aerobic exercise
um the other one is journaling so
writing out what's on your mind rather
than just let it be in there and keep
going round and round
or if you've got a therapist or a
trusted friend speaking it out loud so
it's all about
getting cortisol
and or the negative thoughts that are
associated with your stress out of your
brain body system
I think this is fascinating I looked at
the back end of our YouTube channel and
it says that since this channel started
69.9 percent of you that watch it
frequently haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button so I have a favor to ask you if
you've ever watched this Channel and
enjoyed the content if you're enjoying
this episode right now please can I ask
a small favor please hit the Subscribe
button helps this channel more than I
can explain and I promise if you do that
to return the favor we will make this
show better and better and better and
better and better that's the promise I'm
willing to make you if you hit the
Subscribe button do we have a deal
I've had a real Revelation in my life
over the last
um
maybe six months about sleep again it's
why I said I think before we started
recording that I don't have any meetings
scheduled before 11AM and I sleep with
my eye mask on and I just wake up when I
wake up yeah we do oh really yeah
never really met anybody that has that
it is a privilege I have to acknowledge
that that not everyone can do because of
work circumstances whatever else but
um the importance of sleep
you're a neuroscientist yeah
um there's a lot of people who have
dysfunctional sleep we live in a world
where I feel like it's increasingly
difficult to have
you know great sleep
um how important is that for the brain
and also you know we're talking about
stress there but for yeah containing our
stress levels
it's so important I can't stop going on
about it and I do understand that for
some people it's not a choice that they
just don't sleep well or they have their
sleep gets interrupted because they've
got young kids or they do shift work so
I'm not particularly talking about the
people where there's a reason that you
can't sleep in this way I'm mostly
directing it this out if you have a
choice
this is the way that you need to sleep
and this is why if you don't have a
choice there are some things that you
can do to mitigate it as well I mean
obviously I
have done shift work as a junior doctor
in the NHS and I travel a lot so I'm
like jet lagged half the time but I try
to do everything I can
to make that as good as possible and the
reason is
we've always known that when you sleep
you lay down your memories and new
learning you process your emotions the
cells and the body regenerate themselves
we've known that for a long time that's
never really been enough for
these very driven CE level people to
want to give up eight hours a night to
sleep you know it's
if they feel they can get by on four or
five then they'll rather do that because
they've got so much to do
the ideal is eight hours and 15 minutes
in population Norm studies so that
doesn't mean it's for everyone but for
most people that's the ideal actually
sleeping more than that can be
depressogenic so it can start to lower
your mood so you don't want to really be
sleeping for nine plus hours but you
ideally need to be in bed for nine hours
to get that amount of sleep
and so there was some
award-winning research around 2012 to
2014 when we were beginning to
understand how important the cleaning of
the brain is overnight
so this entirely new system that we
didn't know existed which is called the
glymphatic system it's like the
lymphatic system in your body but it's
to do with glial cells so it was named
the glymphatic system
that system
is a very active
kind of Waterway Channel cleansing
system of the brain we used to think
that the fluid around the brain and
there's ventricles which are like lakes
and then there's just like trickling
areas that that sort of passively
dripped through the brain overnight
we did not expect to see like Jets of
fluid
flushing out toxins from the brain so
the exact things that we see in the
pathology of dementing diseases like
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's like Tau
proteins and amyloid plaques and
neurofibrillary Tangles
um how do you say that in English
those things are being flushed out of
the brain very actively overnight and
that process takes seven to eight hours
to complete the cleaning that's why you
need to be in bed for eight to nine
hours
so it takes seven or eight hours to of
restorative sleep or just being in bed
just sleep not in bed if you're in bed
awake
you're not asleep you know you have to
be asleep but you'll go through the
different sleep cycles every 90 minutes
this isn't in time with that this is
just taking seven or eight hours to
flush this stuff out of your brain so
one of the things I do say to people who
don't sleep well is if you find yourself
awake at night and you're not lying on
your side turn yourself onto your side
because that's the best position for
this cleansing process
I actually have a special pillow that
makes me sleep on my side
because I wasn't naturally a side
sleeper so it doesn't matter if the left
or the right but that is a better
position in terms of the veins in your
neck
um than sleeping on your back or your
front so that's one thing you can do oh
you woke up you know your sleep was
Disturbed at least turn yourself onto
your side
what is this special pillow
I guess you just bragged about it then
moved on I feel like it's a memory foam
pillow am I allowed to mention the brand
of course yeah we'll make sure they
sponsor it before
memory foam pillow this my one is by
Temple UK
um and they actually they gifted it to
me because I was talking about side
seeing things yeah it's great okay I'm a
side sleeper my girlfriend's a back
sleeper but I can't sleep on my back
it's funny because I start on my front
that lasts for 15 minutes because I get
bad back at the bottom of my back yeah I
roll onto my side but I I've always
wondered if there was um when you look
at tribes and our ancestors how they
would sleep would they sleep in groups
would they sleep alone would they sleep
on their side their back
do you know the answers to any of that
um I know that co-sleeping is definitely
how we evolved from co-sleeping so in
groups and
what was what I find interesting is that
you needed to huddle together like that
for physical warmth in the cave
but it also because of that proximity
and and interaction you got more of the
bonding hormone oxytocin so you also
experienced the warmth of being part of
a tribe
um and I think they stepped on their
side because they would have to be ready
for an attack from a predator so you'd
need to keep your dominant arm
um ready to you know grab something and
most likely they slept on their left
because they would have been protecting
their most vital organs the heart
um just thinking then about this bonding
chemical and how it comes out when we're
in close proximity a lot of couples a
lot of people me sometimes as well
sleep in the spare room
because I have work commitments but that
will mean that I'm up early or my
partner has work commitments I mean
she's up early but even some of my
friends who are in the early stages of
Parenthood have separated and have a
sleep divorce situation when you talked
about the bonding in the oxytocin being
released when we're in close approximity
and obviously at night time is when
we're literally touching each other is
it conceivable that by separating rooms
and by doing a sleep divorce we're
actually eroding our bonding I would
never do it you would never sleep in a
different room
from maybe if there was a young baby and
one person had to go to work and one
person didn't
that I get but that's temporary
and
ideally people would find ways to make
up for that I mean I guess you're in a
bit of a love Bubble with the oxytocin
from the baby at that time so that is
quite neuroprotective
but
co-sleeping is it's it's fundamental to
our survival it was physically when we
were in the cave but now I would say
emotionally spiritually it's fundamental
to our survival I mean what do you mean
by co-sleeping just a clarify sleeping
together
so mostly in you know in our society
that's as a couple but a lot of other
cultures the whole family sleeps
together why would you never do it you
seemed quite passionate about that
because I it's so good for you the
bonding the physical warmth the skin to
skin contact the
love the trust you know I mean I'll put
up if some if somebody's waking up early
and I don't have to wake up at that time
I'll even put up with that
so you'll have less quality sleep it
won't be less quality see if I've worn
HIV monitors and shown that even at the
time if
my husband woke up at five and I
wouldn't wake up any like at all before
eight and he gave me a kiss goodbye I
got a spike of resilience at that time
resilience yeah
how do you measure that so I was using
that finished technology
um where you wear the HRV monitor with a
gel pad on your chest
um and so it's color-coded for whether
you're doing light exercise heavy
exercise whether you're stressed or
whether you're recouping resilience
and mostly people recoup resilience
overnight but
um you know you could clearly see with
people with young children you could see
when they were woken up overnight
because it would go in distress some
people recoup resilience during the day
if you know let's say you're like with
your partner or your sibling and you're
just sitting together and it's super
relaxed or if you love your job you know
that you can see that happening during
the day as well
but because I am so
obsessed with my sleep
I wouldn't normally welcome any sleep
disturbance
but the power of sleeping together and
cuddling all night
is so neuroprotective
that
I would encourage everybody to do it if
they can I also know some people who say
oh I sleep better if I sleep on my own
um but we were not meant to survive on
our own we are meant to survive as part
of a tribe and
I think now you know since the pandemic
people are more lost and lonely and
disconnected than ever if you've got
somebody that you can actually sleep
with overnight I strongly suggest that
you do it
so I want to go in that direction
because I'm super compelled by that the
change in the world and the loss the
lonely the disconnected but just to
pause for a second on this word
resilience you're using linked to heart
rate variability you're talking about
like a physiological resilience like a
the body being more resilient versus the
kind of when we talk about resilience we
we say in more of a psychological
context of like I can withstand
greatest stressful pressure but you'll
you use the heart rate variability
monitor that measures the distance
between Heartbeats
and saw that when your husband gave you
a kiss your heart rate variability
increased which means that your body was
more physiologically resilient it
actually measures both because it
Compares your heart rate variability to
your heart rate okay so it knows if
you're exercising because your heart
rate has gone up but if your heart rate
is at like base level
then the so then then the very the
change in variability can either mean
that you're stressed or you're recouping
resilience if your heart rate is high
then it's obviously physical
um but
it it's a it's a factor of both so it's
not just looking at
physical resilience it is looking when
it's in this turquoise Zone
that is actually more about recouping
psychological resilience but those two
things you know they feed into each
other but it can tell the difference
because of your heart rate so obviously
I was asleep so my heart rate was low
and you saw what on the monitoring I
literally saw us but because it does it
by every 15 minutes as well and I saw
the highest Spike of turquoise at that
exact time
funny because my um girlfriend a couple
about a month ago or two months ago I
left the house quite early in the
morning maybe about the similar time 6
a.m in the morning when she was still in
bed and I came up to her and gave her
like a big kiss I basically kissed all
around if this is so softly I kissed all
around her face and on her nose and just
gave her a big big hug and stuff and I
walked away like got on the got in the
taxi and left whatever
and she said to me the same day or the
day after she went I don't know what
happened there but it unlocks something
in me and you know then my girlfriend
went on to say she'd um had some
challenges with her menstrual cycle and
and she came on her period
that's amazing he's always right like
when she says things to me and she knows
this but I give her a credit I'm always
skeptical because we think differently
she's quite spiritual I'm very like I
need some science and
um
she said that to me and I just thought a
kiss and a hug in the morning it hasn't
couldn't have had any physiological
impact on her
but
um now I'm starting to question whether
once again I was wrong
that's amazing I mean you know some of
these things can't necessarily
immediately be explained by science but
if you use your intuition then
you have to ask yourself and I feel like
you are coming around to thinking that
could be true when I'm when I'm given a
reason I accept things if you know if
there's even
a Slither of science that could justify
it then I I come around to ideas but I
do need the science do you think that
men and women are different in terms of
their intuition and their their ability
to want you're smiling their ability to
kind of understand some of these forces
that exist in the air because my
girlfriend seems to be so attuned to
feelings and intuition and and I'm less
so
yeah so if let's let's put it like this
if you had a hundred people in a room 50
men and 50 women
and you ask them to line up in order of
height
not all the men would be taller than all
the women in the middle there'd be a bit
of a mixture
and it's like that with the brain and
intuition and everything else so
yeah there are some
there's some disparity so I think most
people would agree that it feels like
more women are in touch with their
intuition than men but it's absolutely
not all women
versus all men
do you believe women are more in touch
with their intuition
I think they're more open to accepting
that it's a thing and
I believe that the more men need the
science to explain how intuition works
interesting I wonder if there was like a
brain uh neurological reason for that
I think there'd be more women and men
that believed in intuition and those
like
feelings that are hard to explain in
this yeah you know that's changed a lot
I mean I remember when I was teaching at
MIT about seven years ago and I was
teaching the science of intuition
someone actually stood at that you know
it's all senior leaders in the classroom
it's Executive Education
um someone stood up and said well I'm
not going to make a really important
decision like hire or Fire based on my
gut feeling am I and he was quite young
and quite a few of the older guys turned
around and were like that's absolutely
how I would make my decision and my most
important decisions but at that time it
was still kind of like not everybody was
really sure that that's like your
superpower but I think people are
beginning to understand more that with
age and experience and wisdom you do
understand that intuition is actually
your strongest it should be your
strongest decision making modality what
is intuition
so
because you can't remember everything
that you've experienced in your whole
life
but you know somewhere in the neural
architecture and and you know in the gut
neurons as well
that information is stored because you
have experienced it
so maybe you would say that you
understand that wisdom and experience is
the product of patterns that you've seen
repeating in your life that are
conscious to you intuition is the
lessons that you've picked up along the
way that you're not conscious of but
they're still stored in your nervous
system
and so the less conscious you are of
them the deeper they're pushed into the
nervous system so there's a process
called hebian learning named after the
neuroscientist Donald Hebb and that is
it's basically you know neurons that
fire together wire together but it's
that the things that you've learned
today like things that you've learned by
speaking with me that's going to be very
front of mind and kind of just in like
little Pathways that are just kind of
connecting up with each other but stuff
that you learn when you were five like
when you put your hand in a fire and it
burnt you and you never ever want to do
that again that's deep down you're not
really conscious of that but you know
and other things maybe that you don't
recall
so we believe that your that wisdom gets
pushed from the outer cortex
into the limbic system which is the
emotional system of the brain into the
brain stem into the spinal cord and into
the gut neurons and that's why they
sometimes call it gut instinct because
it's that feeling of knowing something
but not knowing why you know it
um but it's actually to do with the fact
that you have wisdom and experience
that is
it's in it's it's embodied in you but
you're not conscious of it necessarily
it's quite surprising to hear that those
memories that wisdom can be
in the gut people think of you know I
think I'm certainly someone who always
thought that my cognition my memories
and my all of the intelligence exists
just in my brain
your memories and your cognition
and your IQ
are in your brain
but your intuition is in your brain and
your gut
this sounds super stupid but I don't
care I should just be I should just be
honest about my stupidity where in my
gut
I thought that was like my stomach
that's where I put the food yeah so you
know you've got your stomach you've got
your small intestine you've got your
large intestine yeah you have other
organs your liver your spleen
your kidneys and they're all innovated
which means they've all got nerves going
into them so does your heart so you know
we could we could have a similar
conversation like this about your heart
as well because your heart only knows
how to be because of the nerves that
that penetrate it
so you know this round brain in here and
the spinal cord that goes down the
center of your back that gives rise to
all of the neurons that go out to your
arms your legs all of your organs your
skin which is your largest organ
and
so that's that's how that works because
every single part of your body has no
nerve cells or you know nerve Pathways
in them so that's the connection
that brings us back to what you know
what I was saying about the brain Body
Connection they're they're intimately
connected and it's a bi-directional
thing it's they can't
exist without each other
and the more you understand that there's
that constant feedback going back and
forth the more you can tap into that
kind of thing the more you can
know days before you're going to get
sick I bet your girlfriend knows days
before she's going to get a cold or flu
yes she does yeah all the time and my
clients
never know and as soon as they go on
holiday they're sick the whole week
why when they go on holiday
because they suppress it to be able to
do their job
and you can suppress illness or you can
just not not acknowledge it it's it's
not necessarily that they had a cold
virus that they suppressed but it's that
their body is you know the immune system
is being run down by the cortisol and so
as soon as it gets a break
that's when it kind of succumbs
um and there was a time after the
financial crisis when
I had people saying I've had you know
I've had this cold for like four weeks
now or six weeks but everybody's got it
and I was like
I'm sorry but do you actually think
that's normal do you think it's normal
to have a cold for more than a week
and you know then it takes a challenge
like that because also the other thing
that happens in you know with group
think whether it's at work or in your
Social Circle is that we don't challenge
each other enough on those sort of
things so if a friend said oh I've had
this code for six weeks
I might say oh poor you but
if I I wouldn't but someone might but um
you know it's also about saying is there
something else wrong because that's not
that's not usual
um and for me that would absolutely lead
back to cortisol
a second ago we were going to go around
the pathway of the looming crisis
that you speak about
what is the looming crisis that you're
concerned about
Stephen I I saw this looming at the
beginning of the pandemic it's not
looming anymore it is we are in crisis
so you know all of the health anxiety
and the uncertainty and the fear and the
loss that we experienced
um during the pandemic
was bad enough you know it caused a
level of stress that no one who's alive
today has experienced before
um
but we've come out of it
you know we're relatively
I don't know if I could say back to
normal or in The New Normal
and we have not paid any attention to
the consequences of what happened to us
and when I say us I mean everyone from
the babies that were born at that time
that never saw anyone but their
immediate family
the teenagers that interestingly boys
did better than girls because they play
video games on the internet so they
stayed connected
you know the older people that were
isolated the people that like lost loved
ones Etc like there's so many things I
could say more things than that we we
haven't really acknowledged that that's
what happened and what we went through
we
most people are not really
understanding what's changed for them or
what's going on for them at the moment
as a result of that and we certainly
haven't made any plan for the future
um
you know I'm really into like indigenous
wisdom at the moment and one of the
things I've learned about the first
Americans is that when they make a big
decision for their Community they
imagine the impact of that decision
Seven Generations into the future we
don't even think about one generation
into the future
we just think about
like what's going on right now we we
don't even really think about our own
future like some of the time
I remember thinking like literally in
March of 2020 this is going to be a
mental health crisis like whatever
happens physically
and as time went on more so I thought
Mental Health crisis Mental Health
crisis
and then I started to think okay
what else could it be
and
I had time of course to indulge in some
of the other areas of interest that I
couldn't when I was like traveling and
working for lawn so I you know started
reading more about spirituality in
ancient cultures and stuff
and I thought this could be a spiritual
Revolution when you say spiritual
Revolution
it's a very big Broad
term
what do you mean
if I look back and you've you know
you've led a very nice story of of my my
journey since I changed career is that
it started off with that physical piece
you know for me where I was working
there was stress but people were having
heart attacks
then I spent many years working on
mental resilience with people
um
and emotional regulation was part of
that and that became important again in
the pandemic because we were in like
Close Quarters with people and you know
and it was just very different and it
was hard and it was homeschooling and
working and everything
um what I've seen as some of the good
things I've seen as a result of the
pandemic is that we've definitely
appreciated again the importance of our
time in nature
um so I think most of us felt that that
you know being able to get out and be
somewhere green was really important and
because there was like no planes and no
traffic you know we could see the stars
in the sky again we saw amazing sunsets
we people began to appreciate bird song
and now the studies are showing that
time spent in nature actually has a
really positive impact on your physical
health your mental health and your
longevity
so you know that's one good thing that's
come out of it but are we all still you
know making time for that or are we just
going back to kind of our old ways the
other thing things of interest that have
come out is that having a purpose that
transcends yourself
is really important to your mental
health particularly but it will have
knock-on effects so
you know you could say
well I do my podcast and I love doing my
podcast and I get to meet interesting
people and I you know I share that
knowledge with others
a lot of that is still to do with
self-satisfaction so having something
that doesn't necessarily do anything for
you
but gives you purpose in life is really
important and what could that be that
could be
that could be volunteering it could be
um
you know for you know for me like I I
give out a lot of free information on
Instagram that and not for to try to get
work or anything like that
um it could be so you know when I say
volunteering that sounds quite big but
it could be like asking your elderly
neighbor if you can do their groceries
for them when you go to the supermarket
um it could be calling up a friend and
checking that they're okay
just something that makes you feel like
life is worth living
but it doesn't necessarily earn you
money or directly improve your life I've
spoken to a lot of therapists who talk
about the fact that we two of the things
we never want to feel is like we're a
different and B we're not enough
and I was thinking about that through
the lens of our tribes in the context of
a tribe if I was different there was a
risk of me being kicked off The Tribe
and if I didn't feel like I was enough I
I again would have a risk of being
kicked out of the tribe because I'm not
valuable to the tribe and in the context
of what you were saying about serving
others is that again sort of like a
prehistoric desire to
um feel like we're adding value and we
are of use to the tribe by serving the
greater good of the of our tribe is that
where that instinct comes from in us I
love what you've done which is exactly
what I said which is when I when I'm not
sure of the answer I'll go back to
Evolution I always do that yeah yeah I
love that I think
I hadn't thought of it like that exactly
like that before but I think it's true
you know a tribe sadly could not afford
to carry dead weight
so if you weren't enough you know if you
were injured if you were
immobile if you were elderly
if you weren't contributing then you
might get left behind
and then there's this um really
interesting new area of research called
neuro Aesthetics or neuro Arts which is
about having some kind of creative
activity in your regular schedule
so um there's there's lots of research
that shows that if you're not doing
something creative once a week and that
could be dance music
painting drawing going to the theater
reading a novel so really quite broad
time and nature actually is included in
it then because nature is the palette
that we all love you know you could have
different taste in art or music to me
but all humans love nature because we've
always been in that that beauty so the
impact of that on your mental health and
your physical health and your longevity
is huge as well but even just like every
morning I actually thought of this this
morning because I I wanted to mention
this but I had zested a lemon last night
when I was cooking and so this morning
when I went to get the milk out of the
fridge I I smelt it because it was in
the fridge and I just thought that is so
beautiful and so they say things like
you know if you've put like a bunch of
flowers on your bedside table and it
smells nice and that's the first thing
you smell in the morning and then you
like look at the beautiful flowers if
you've
got objects of Beauty in your house if
you listen to Birdsong in the morning
that that's all newer Aesthetics it's
living a life
that is aesthetically pleasing to your
brain
and that's good for your health why
um
should we go back to Evolutions please
that's my favorite thing to do
I think it's to do with safety so
if you were able to spare your mental
resources to appreciate Beauty
that must mean that you're safe that
must mean that you're not just trying to
survive
so it's actually I mean we do appreciate
Beauty so
seeing smelling you know hearing tasting
nice things it's going to make us feel
better but also
we're only going to be doing that if
we have the luxury of being able to do
that then it can be such small things
but also what it signals to your brain
is I'm safe because I have time to read
a novel or I have time to crank the
music up and dance around my living room
through the frame of this idea that
Pathways that fire together wire
together
I was also thinking about every time
I've seen a tree I've been safe so is
there an association at trees of safety
you know what I mean every time I've
been out in nature yeah I've been
physiologically psychologically safe so
is it now the case that because there's
that neurological Association the
pathways have widened fired together if
I you know you talk about the brain body
response if I put myself in that
situation again it will signal to my
body that I'm safe yeah it will that's
neuroplasticity it's it's repeating that
and giving yourself the message that
every time I'm around trees I'm safe I
feel safe it won't be the same for
everyone I would imagine that again when
we lived in the cave that
we naturally did things like looked at
the stars in the sky at night danced
around the fire did cave paintings
um so that's very wired into our our
psyche as well
um you know they would Adorn themselves
a lot more than we do
so that appreciation of Aesthetics
has always been there and not just from
nature from some of our rituals and
ceremonies as well and really the
conclusion that I've come to with this
whole spiritual crisis and and then the
potential Revolution is that all the
things that we need
to go through that Revolution have
always been in the world as long as
we've existed
and that to me is beautiful because it's
not like we have to do some crazy new
different things that we've never
thought of before
we can
the way that I put it is we know about
generational trauma and
intergenerational drama and epigenetics
and how all these bad things can like
come down the line but there's also a
lot of beauty and wisdom that's there
that we can have access to it's it's we
don't have to like reinvent the wheel at
all we can just go back to doing the
things that we did
when we were at peace
it's interesting but it but that's not
gonna that's not easy to do in the
worlds we live in because we've built a
society in a world where yeah
we live in these like white four white
walls in cities alone yeah we're more
lonely than ever before we order our
food using glass screens we use
pornography as a replacement for
intimacy and connection these social
networks instead of socializing
internet connection has reduced real
connection
how you'd have to like completely
redesign Society it seems
you can start with yourself
so
I completely agree with what all those
things that you've just said is how most
people live
but I don't live like that
how do you live doctor
um I I actively tried to spend as much
time in nature as I can and I have for
like a lot of like plants and flowers in
and around my house
I am very very careful about who's in my
tribe so it's positive meaningful deep
spiritual relationships
um
I
don't use pornography or dating apps
I just go through your legs
um
yeah and I you know I try what do you
think of pornography on the brain
I mean
the two most basic drives in the brain
are sex and food
so the potential impact is is huge
um
I agree with you that increasingly it
has created a big disconnect between men
and women in real life which is really
sad
what is that disconnect
um I
have an ideal of what a woman
would be or can be is very distorted by
pornography
um
I think if I put together you know what
I hear from my friends about dating apps
with that that
the way that people feel they can treat
others has really really changed and I
think this has accelerated since the
pandemic as well
um so this real lack of empathy for the
consequences of your actions and
comments on other people and I think
pornography contributes to that because
it
changes the way that men view women
um
I think the impact on women in terms of
what you have to look like like how much
plastic surgery you have to have what
you've got to be prepared to like do in
an intimate relationship or or actually
the biggest issue I would have is what
you're expected to do when you're not
even in an intimate relationship you
know just when it becomes more of a
transaction when the rules have changed
about
you know again what I hear now very
commonly is oh we've been on three or
four or five dates or whatever it is
that must mean
you know
move to the next level kind of thing so
I think that going back to
having like really respectful
relationships having a lot of empathy
for other people looking out for the
people in your life that might be
lonelier than you
um
when I say you know I mean I absolutely
do not have my phone in my bedroom but
when I say limit screen time that is a
difficult one because we will use our
screens for work and to communicate with
our friends but there are studies that
show the amount of time you spend
even communicating with friends online
versus face-to-face has all sorts of
impacts in terms of like how
like socially comfortable you are how
empathic you are it can even have on
teenagers a really big impact on body
dysmorphism
so it's fine to actually spend quite a
lot of time online as long as you are
also spending a lot of time with people
face to face
one of the things you said though was
about limiting who's in your tribe
why is that important
why is it important to not hang around
with certain people and spend more time
with other people from like a
neurological perspective in terms of our
health and our outlooks and our outcomes
and neuroplasticity so if we just like
link this back a little bit to the
question that you Googled which is
stress contagious
then there's another Rabbit Hole you
could go down which would be about
social Contagion
so there are statistics that show that
in your social group if someone gets
divorced you're more likely to get
divorced in the next year
if someone in your social group is obese
you're more likely to become obese now
I'm not absolutely not saying don't be
friends with someone because they got
divorced or they put on weight but I'm
talking more about the
attitudinal stuff
so the
you know how you treat other people how
kind you are how generous you are how
open you are to conversations about
Intuition or spirituality basically you
meet people who are at a similar
psychological level to you
and
so
we're always working on ourselves
hopefully and you want to be with people
if you are then you want to be with
people who are growing too who are open
to challenge who are learning who
are interested in exploring spirituality
um who care about their mental health
and other people's mental health so it's
really
about you know having this this circle
of trust
and knowing that you've got support but
equally that if you do something that's
really not okay that somebody's going to
tell you
you mentioned the word earlier
neuroplasticity
what is it why did it matter and
I think from looking at your work
previously you had a bit of an epiphany
on this subject matter in your career or
you realize that you know are you
probably like most most people don't
even think it's a thing they don't think
it's
they think that once you grow up you're
set in your ways but it sounds like
there was an epiphany at some point in
your career where you realize the
importance and the possibilities that
neuroplasticity presented well we have
to start by saying that when I was at
medical school and doing my PhD in
Neuroscience we did not know about
neuroplasticity so we absolutely thought
that when you physically stopped growing
that everything in your brain was set
for the rest of your life that you
couldn't change your intelligence you
couldn't learn to manage your emotions
differently
um that it would be much harder to learn
new things
what we know now is that the brain is
actively growing and changing till we're
about 25.
and
I missed it no you didn't you didn't
miss it I know I looked 24 but you
didn't miss it so from 25 to 65 and I
would say even Beyond now
if you don't do anything to change your
brain it will tend to Plateau so you
know if you're in a job where you do the
same thing every day and you're pretty
good at it
you could stay like that for the rest of
your life and that is fine for some
people
if you do things to that are intense
enough
to force your brain to change then you
can basically you know learn lots of new
things but also get what we call Global
benefits in your brain so let's say you
decided to learn a new language
maybe you'd learned Portuguese or French
have you spoken to her
have you spoken so
that just felt very it feels like you
know when someone says something to you
and it feels like they've already had a
conversation behind your back because
it's so on the money no I actually have
a deal with her this year that I'd learn
Portuguese by the end of the year and
win September now
and I know six words so that just felt a
little bit close to home so um let's
move on so so that's great so you have
actually a reason to learn one or two
languages if you do that
your brain will not only get the
benefits of being able to speak French
or Portuguese but you will actually
improve your executive functions now
these are the highest functions of the
brain things like
um being able to regulate your emotions
better solve complex problems think
flexibly think creatively override any
conscious or unconscious biases that you
may have
these are great benefits to get from
actually just doing something like
learning a language or a musical
instrument
um and it can be smaller things like
travel interacting with people who've
had a different life to you cooking
something new taking a different route
to work reading a newspaper or a
magazine that's very different to what
you normally read doing a podcast well
you do this every day yeah exactly yeah
so it's not inducing neuroflasticity in
your brain although you're learning
different people yeah you're meeting
different people you're learning new
things
but it's probably not what we would call
attention intense enough
to actually be shifting Pathways in your
brain
wow
having all these conversations isn't
like expanding my it is in terms of your
like the facts that you're learning yeah
but your actual process of you know
finding a person doing a bit of research
into them meeting them having a
conversation with them being good at
asking them certain questions
that's a very natural pathway for you so
you know you're getting better and
better at it but that's not a new big
change in your brain
so what okay right so I think when
people hear about neuroplasticity when I
first heard about that it was even a
thing it was a revelation that we could
do things to change our brains what is
what is it that people typically want
from neuroplasticity they want to be
someone else in other ways they want new
habits they want new ways of thinking
they want to stop being a negative
thinker or an overthinker in certain
situations if I wanted to to stop being
an overthinker or a negative thinker or
if I wanted to
um
you know there's certain habits we all
have and that I have in my life that I'm
like I just feel like it's me now
yeah like procrastination
procrastination shows up sometimes I'm
just saying things
no I don't I don't procrastinate too
much because I don't really have a
choice these days I procrastinate on
some things I think we all do things
that I find yeah yeah we all do
um no I'm really glad you've taken this
into the intangible because obviously I
use the analogy of language as a great
one to help people understand that you
you learn something new it builds up
that pathway in your brain it shifts
your brain around it has other benefits
but what people are really looking for
is changing habits and behaviors that
are not serving them in life yeah so
whether it's lack of motivation yeah
like a motivation overthinker negative
thinker lose you lose your temper
um
uh you know sort of feel very stuck
people pleasing you know like so many
things mood reactions yeah yeah so the
process for that which is underpinned by
neuroplasticity like the physiology of
what happens in the brain is raised
awareness so let's say that you've you
know you've had a relationship break up
again for the similar reasons and you
know whatever happened before
so then you get to a point you're like
okay
last time I just kind of didn't really
deal with that and just moved on to the
next relationship now I'm beginning to
see there's a pattern I think I need to
do something different Step One is spot
the pattern and step one is 50 of the
battle
so you know once you know okay this is a
thing that I think or I believe or I do
that comes out with a result that I
don't want that is half the battle so
once you've done that
you don't try to change anything
straight away the next stage is called
focused attention
so you look around in your life at work
in your personal life in like you know
Sports if you play sports
um with different types of people and
through your past where are the times
I've done that what what what triggers
me into doing that or what pushes me
into doing that let me give you an
example so we can work through this uh
these steps with an example got a friend
in my life that repeatedly
dates people who are married or in a
relationship oh
and it ends how you'd expect it to end
in her heartbreak yeah but it's this
spiral she's on yeah so
step one would be becoming aware of this
pattern you're dating people that are in
this for some reason you're
so in this case that is obvious if
you're if you're getting into
relationships with people who are
already attached you know you're aware
of that what I would want to dig into
with her
is what it is that she believes about
herself
that makes her think that that's okay
and I'm imagining already that there
must be a
a level of self-worth that is
has struggled you know and maybe there's
something in her childhood that's caused
that but
you'd only do that if you didn't believe
that you deserved someone of your own
so that's the kind of conversation I
would have with someone like that I
would
I would probably ask her like you know
what what goes through your mind when
you decide to do that again and she
would say something that she's conscious
of thinking I would want to dig below
that and ask what it is that she
believes about herself that makes her
think that so that's quite an important
part of the raised awareness is getting
below the thought into the belief next
step is or certainly if if she's got a
history of this is you know maybe in
journaling acknowledging writing down
okay this time that I went out with
someone that was you know kind of
engaged in a relationship with someone
else or this time I had an affair with a
married man what happened like that
decision-making process the point from
which you agreed to get into that what
was the consequence so really
that's the focused attention marrying
together that decision with the
consequence you know one of the things I
say is you are basically the sum of
every decision that you've made in your
life that's who you are
so once there's a bit more understanding
and attention around like what causes
that and how it happens the next stage
is deliberate practice so the first
challenge is going to be the next time
she meets a man
who's not available
and she may not yet be able to say no to
that she may have to make another
mistake but she'll make it armed with
all the knowledge that she's got now
and she'll see it for what it is
or she will be able to say no to that
man this time
so the next step is deliberate practice
which is where you say okay I used to
behave like this uh this is the new me
that I want to be as somebody who says
no to every man that's married who
um you know replaces every negative
thought with a positive thought or
whatever it is that you're working on
you then look for scenarios to practice
this new behavior and at first it would
be hard because you have a pathway there
that may have been set since childhood
that is used to doing a certain thing
and the brain is a very energy-hungry
organ so it's it's always trying to use
the path of least resistance let's say
I'm an overthinker okay and you're
asking me these questions and I've got
this voice in the back of my head saying
why is Stephen asking me that what's he
trying to get to is he trying to trick
me what I would what I would try to do
is silence that voice in my head and say
okay in this podcast with Stephen I'm
going to focus on him I'm going to take
his questions for what they are and I'm
going to speak from my area of expertise
I'm not going to worry about that other
stuff that you know can go on in my head
and
let's say this time I managed to do that
50 of the time and then I go and do
another podcast next week and I manage
to do it 75 of the time you know and so
on eventually this new pathway that I've
been building will become stronger than
the one that I had before and then every
time I turn up for a podcast I'll just
be completely present and attentive and
I'll get to the end of it and that's the
new me now
so behaviors that we repeat so let's
start starting at the beginning of those
three steps the first step is becoming
aware of the
pattern in our lives the second step is
becoming really cognizant of the pain or
the consequences of that
pattern and the third step is kind of
like setting an intention for who we
want to become and the goals we have and
then practicing it as much as possible
and that is the three steps to the
fourth it's not a step but the fourth
factor is accountability because most
people left to their own devices will
give up on that process when it feels
too hard a step three yeah
um so
you know with years of practice and
journaling I have become better at
holding myself accountable
but for most people there's got to be
some external so it could be a friend
um one of the reasons I'm a big fan of
doing these action boards is that
there's a very tangible thing in front
of you that with images of what you said
you wanted to achieve this year which
you can clearly and your friends and
family can see at the end of the year
whether you did or you didn't
um and you know of course you can have
an actual like professional person that
is there like your language teacher to
hold you accountable
to we're gonna have to edit this out
because you really are pushing this
you've got an agenda here I I've been
really you talked earlier about just a
second ago about how
when you're trying to create a new
pathway if there's an existing one that
is very well established from your
childhood it's increasingly harder so
I've always been unorganized I lived I
grew up in a home that was looked like
an atomic bomb had hit it yeah it was
just a show inside it was an
absolute mess so that habit of just
being messy is quite well established
the pathway in my brain of being messy
is well established yeah but more
broadly I'm thinking here about trauma
and how trauma looks in the brain when
we've had really traumatic early
experiences in our life or in the
context of my friend we might have
learned that we're not deserving of
someone or we we're not worthy or we you
know we're not enough or we're different
that might be a really well established
pathway
does doesn't that
suggest that there are some Behavior
patterns that are just
practically immovable practically
unchangeable
I don't want to say yes to that but what
I am going to say is we've moved away
from using this term hardwired which
kind of means like it's there forever
and we talk about soft wiring now
because of neuroplasticity
I know people who have been through
incredible amounts of trauma there's
going to be an example coming up on my
podcast soon who has done so much work
on herself
that she's really in a beautiful place
as a psychologist and a Vedic astrologer
helping other people learn to deal with
that drama
so
there's a lot that can happen she was
clearly a very resilient person and got
herself educated
some people deal with the consequences
of trauma for the rest of their life and
you know it runs their life and it's
it's sad
um you may not be able to
deal with every single thing that you've
experienced or the full extent of what
you've experienced but I do believe that
there's a lot that everybody can do
earlier you talked about generational
trauma
um and epigenetics as you said what are
both of those things the first time I
heard about generational trauma I
thought it was like woo-woo
uh fluffy
hopeful like wishful think like a nice
way to blame your ancestors for the way
that you are
so when I first heard about this concept
that you you could be passed down Trauma
from your parents or your grandparents
it just seemed like it can possibly be
true yeah I know I mean it's relatively
new area of research so
I'm actually going to separate this into
a few things so generational trauma
um and you can look this up is related
to specific
times of Acts that were
um placed onto particular marginalized
groups
so like first Americans slavery
um
there's in in Asia there are some
particular groups that were
um
treated in a certain way
and that is so the impact of
generational trauma is when something
happened to one generation
there's a psychological spillover and it
can be something to do with you always
feel isolated or you always feel lonely
or you always feel at the margin or you
always feel left out that's because a
whole generation retreated in a certain
way and that has an impact
intergenerational epigenetic trauma is
about how some external
event
actually changes the expression of your
genes
so we have a genotype and a phenotype
genotype is your DNA it doesn't change
but the phenotype is which bits get
switched on and Switched Off
the most famous examples of this are the
Holocaust and the Dutch famine but there
are other examples and we are sufficient
Generations away from that now to have
seen like three plus Generations changes
in the stress responses
and so and it's not always bad so
sometimes people are more resilient
because their grandparents or great
grandparents went through something
terrible sometimes people are more
anxious and it's hard to know
necessarily why things might go one way
or another
I always say to people that you aren't
born with the genes that your parents
had when they were born you're born with
the expression of the genes that your
parents had around the time of
conception
and then of course your mother's stress
levels through through the trimesters of
pregnancy and this isn't meant to blame
anyone for what happened in the past or
how stressed they feel when they're
pregnant it's meant to raise awareness
of the fact that if you have something
in your family's history or you did have
a particular stress particularly
stressful pregnancy you can use
neuroplasticity to improve the chances
of your baby expressing genes that will
be more helpful for them in life than if
you didn't know about all of this stuff
so if you had a particularly stressful
pregnancy let's say you're a woman who
was really under stress when you were
um
eight months pregnant
how does that impact the baby and what
what symptoms do you like to likely to
see in that baby that it wouldn't have
had otherwise
okay so I'm going to give you a really
like tangible answer before I take it
back to the
um something we were talking about
before imagine the mother's a heroin
addict
that is affecting the baby right yeah
yeah and that's because they share the
same blood supply yeah
so if the mother is stressed and she's
got high levels of cortisol then that
cortisol is going through the placenta
into the baby's blood supply
and basically
being stressed from In Utero could
switch on genes for
not being resilient to stress or being
more
um liable to anxiety or mood disorder
and it's already starting off you know
inflammation and this like tiny baby
that hasn't even been born yet I know
that sounds terrible and I really don't
want this to come across like all mums
have to be completely Zen and never get
stressed because that's just not reality
but you know everything that you can do
of course to manage your stress during
pregnancy is helpful but then completely
understanding that if your child then
starts to show any like symptoms of
anxiety or you know inability to manage
their emotions after an age where they
should be kind of able to do that you
can introduce them to meditation you can
sit with them and talk to them about
their emotions and how they're feeling
there are lots of really like great
books and videos that you can use to
like educate children about that kind of
thing
um
I always say knowledge is power and
unfortunately
difficult things can happen to people in
life but
every time something like that's
happened to me I've gone down a rabbit
hole of okay what can I find that can
help me to overcome this and and be
better
just thinking about as you're talking
about grief and the Brain
the relationship between you know what
happens in the brain when we're
experiencing grief and stuff think about
grief and Heartbreakers strong emotions
so many of us including one of my best
friends is reason is recently grieving a
relationship he's lost and I've got
another friend that's lost someone in
their life he's passed away and it's
such an all-consuming force that seems
to be resistant to advice I just
wondered if through your work you'd
learn anything about grief in the brain
and heartbreaking the brain yeah so I
think there's so many uh versions of
grief that we've seen particularly in
the last few years which has loss of
sense of self
loss of someone through a relationship
breakdown and loss of someone through
actual death
um
and it's interesting to hear you say
as a you know caring onlooker that it's
something that's so overwhelming and
resistant to advice I strongly believe
that
to ever heal from grief
you have to go to the bottom of the hole
and however you do that
is not something that anyone else can
comment on I think if you are doing
things like throwing yourself back into
work or like partying too much to avoid
it that's not right but if somebody has
to go somewhere emotionally to deal with
grief
they've got to be supported and allowed
to do that and
and then maybe at times
gently nudged in terms of like how are
you doing you know is it kind of are you
feeling
any sort of like healing or resolution
or understanding or acceptance I do
think particularly with grief that if we
haven't been through something ourselves
it's it's really hard to imagine how bad
it is even though you might you know
care very deeply
what makes you think that what makes you
think that you have to go to the bottom
of the hole
because I think we are very avoidant
emotionally I think that's part of the
you know greater issue that I was
talking about which is being lost and
disconnected and I remember
when my first marriage broke up and I
was changing career thinking if I hadn't
been a psychiatrist and know the things
that I know I can see how you could end
up on a psychiatric ward going through
you know the breakup breakdown of a
marriage
um so all I'm trying to say I'm not
trying to say you have to feel terrible
what I'm trying to say is you have to
process all the emotions and you kind of
have to surrender to it a bit because if
you try to gloss over that it will come
back and bite you
later
and I've seen many stories of that
happening where people
you know did really great things like
write a book about it or you know shower
all of their care and love and attention
onto other people
and then eventually found that they
hadn't actually dealt with their own
emotions so
when I say go to the the bottom of it I
don't necessarily mean feel really
terrible I mean process all of the
emotions fully because then you can
actually heal and at some stage move
forward it doesn't mean you forget you
know the person or what happened but
if you try to gloss over it I think this
it's it's dangerous because it's such a
deep
it's such a deep emotion it's such a
facing of your own mortality
quick one I discovered a product which
has changed my life called Eight sleep
and I'm so proud to say today that I had
a chat with the founder of the brand and
they are now a podcast sponsor and one
of the things I've come to learn on this
podcast from speaking with Sleep Experts
like Matthew Walker is how important
temperature is when it comes to sleep
the temperature of your room the
temperature of your bed and also one of
the big insights I had from speaking to
some experts was that the temperature of
the room should fluctuate throughout the
night as you move through different
stages of sleep so when you first get
into bed it should be quite cool in bed
it should then get a little bit cooler
and then the temperature should increase
near the end and that is a reflection of
what would have happened in nature once
upon a time you've probably come to
learn that I have sponsors on this
podcast that I use and products that I
love my sponsors should be a reflection
of the conversations I'm having but also
a reflection of what I'm using in my
life so to celebrate them being a new
podcast sponsor I always want to get a
discount for you guys and I've got one
go to eight sleep dot com which is e i g
h t sleep.com slash Stephen and if you
do that you'll save a hundred and fifty
dollars on the Pod cover that I have on
my bed the one I'm talking about grab
your pod cover send me a DM and let me
know how you get on as you may know this
podcast is sponsored by huel if you're
living under a rock you might have
missed that I've come to learn over time
not all of the products they have are
for me but the ones that are for me have
really really changed my life in a
profound way all of the products are
designed for different use cases and
different people for me as you'll
probably know the ready to drink bottles
are a staple of my life at the moment
and they have been for many many years
but for a lot of other people they have
the hot and savory which is a five
minute hot meal that's nutritionally
complete it contains all the good stuff
that all your products contain which is
the 23 vitamins and minerals and the
wonderful balance of sort of nutritional
completeness and then you have the bars
as well if you've heard about Hill on
this podcast you've heard me talking
about it a lot you're aware that I'm an
investor in the company you're aware
that I'm on the board of the company
and you're not sure where to start I
would highly recommend starting with the
best seller bundle basically we'll send
you a package in the pose containing all
of the favorite products that people
love and then you try them all and stick
with the ones that really really fit you
the link is in the description below to
try the best seller bundle in your book
you talk about the mechanisms of
neuroplasticity
what are the mechanisms of
neuroplasticity and the three factors
that have the biggest impact on changes
in the brain so the first one is
myelination and anyone who does a lot of
sport who repeats a certain
um you know weight training will
understand that that's what's happening
in their muscles
you know when I said you know you come
here pretty much every day and you sit
with someone and you interview them and
you're really great at asking questions
that's like something you're super good
at that because you repeat it it becomes
like a superpower and that means that
what's happening there is myelination so
myelin is a fatty substance that coats
some neural Pathways and those Pathways
become fast pathways
now there's a reason from Evolution why
we have some fast Pathways and some slow
Pathways and the reason is that if you
put your hand in the fire your reflex to
snatch your hand out is a fast pathway
but your pain reflex is a slow pathway
because if you're incapacitated by pain
the minute you put your hand in the fire
you wouldn't be able to get away from it
one of the mechanisms of neuroplasticity
is becoming even better at something
that you're really good at and that's
happened through myelination the most
common one which is something that
you're quite good at but if you had
loads of time you could become really
good at it but you maybe don't have
loads of time it happens through
synaptic connections so that's the one
that can feel like quite hard work
but if you put in the effort then you
can change your brain so that means that
neurons that already exist in the brain
connect up with each other and start to
form new pathways
and the third mechanism
which doesn't happen a lot in the adult
brain but it does happen around the
hippocampus because we do lay down new
memories in life
happens a lot in children's Brains it's
called neurogenesis and that is a little
embryonic nerve cells that float around
in the brain actually becoming fully
formed nerve cells neurons and
connecting up through synaptic
connection and maybe getting myelinated
and there's a factor a growth factor
that's involved in that the embryonic
cell becoming an adult cell which is
called bdnf or brain derived
neurotrophic factor and trophic means
growth so neurotrophic is growth of
neurons
and the things that contribute mostly to
that are aerobic exercise and eating
dark-skinned Foods
yeah
skinned Foods yeah so let me discover
the exercise one first because this is
one of my fun facts which is that if you
are regularly doing aerobic exercise
the turnover of those cells in your
brain is about 13 14 percent
to like the the amount in the speed in
which they like die die off no the speed
in which they go from embryonic to full
grown yeah okay so because we want
neurogenesis to happen okay
okay if you haven't been doing exercise
for a while and then you start
the rate of cell turnover is like 30 so
it increases after a period of
inactivity with new aerobic exercise so
that's my excuse for like being a couch
potato half the time and then starting
up again
[Music]
who are you kidding
okay so it will accelerate the speed in
which you're you're making those
connections yeah making the embryonic
cells grow into new cells and then
connect up with existing ones
so I want to make sure I'm super clear
on this so if I'm trying to develop if
I'm trying to speak a different language
by doing exercise that has an impact on
you learn and retain memories yeah
so in
in simple language if I'm doing aerobic
exercise my ability to accelerate my
neuroplasticity
will increase yeah
what if it's like
not aerobic exercise what if I'm just
lifting big weights um there are
benefits to your brain of other types of
exercise but weight training doesn't
relate to neurogenesis as much okay
this isn't so much about language but
it's another example of Mind Over Matter
so this was an experiment done on two
groups of weight lifters I thought you
might like this one
um that's a big compliment thank you so
much you think I'm a weight lifter I
think I identify as a weightlifter
though you looked at me and thought
weightlifter
thank you so much
this was finger and elbow weights though
so maybe not So Glamorous and the six
rounds
so one group
lifted finger or elbow weights I think
this was a two-week study and they
showed I think it was about a 40
increase in in muscle mass of the
targeted muscle group for those weights
they're counterparts
only imagined lifting weights for two
weeks they lifted no weights for two
weeks they just sat there and they
visualized themselves lifting weights
and they had a 13 increase in muscle
mass
interesting
so we can tell our brain to grow muscle
doing that no but I could be doing that
instead I've been going to the gym be
much easier if I could just watch the
football and tell myself that I'm
lifting weights well I don't think you
can watch the football I think the whole
like visualization and you know
intention and attention stuff was an
important part of it I mean that's that
speaks to the the power of our thoughts
again doesn't it really if if our
thoughts can tell our brain to grow
muscles
has that been is that
it's in the book
widely accepted is the truth I'm
surprised there's not like personal
trainers that just sit you down in an
empty room and just go right well think
about the number of athletes that use
visualization as part of their training
of course they do the exercise and the
practice and everything but they that's
hugely used in sports
it's obviously not a case that I would
just then go home and start imagining
working out but it does it does again
remind me of the importance of just
thinking about
um positive things that are in line with
my goals yeah I mean what's the harm in
imagining yourself more muscular or more
youthful alongside eating the dark foods
and getting enough sleep you know it's
like it's part of the package do you
want to know what you should eat so that
you can please what is this dark-skinned
Foods so basically you know at the basic
level we want people to have a healthy
balanced diet mostly plant-based but
where you can choose a darker version of
a food
the um pigment and the skin of that food
has higher levels of antioxidants called
anthocyanins and they also contribute to
neurogenesis so it's basically like
eating black beans instead of white
beans or eating blueberries instead of
strawberries dark chocolate instead of
milk chocolate purple sprouting broccoli
instead of green broccoli
um and good quality coffee counts as
well
yeah so you know I try to
vary what I eat but also always choose
the darker option if I can
okay so is there anything else that
one needs to know about the process of
neuroplasticity so from what I've
ascertained so far it's about stop
understanding
um the patterns we have in our brain
understanding the consequences of them
repetition is key to establishing new
Pathways
um is there anything else that I need to
be really aware of because I do want to
grow my brain and change my brain yeah
so the accountability piece which is but
also creating the conditions in your
body for your brain to be able to do all
of that stuff and so you know this is a
bit of repetition but sleeping roughly
eight hours a night having regular sleep
and wake times seems to have an
additional benefit we don't know why so
within an hour so go to sleep between 10
and 11 wake up whenever
um not being sedentary so being
Physically Active doesn't necessarily
mean you have to pound it at the gym to
be honest in terms of neuroplasticity
you don't want to do too much high
intensity exercise because it spikes
your cortisol levels so it's better to
do kind of quite gentle exercise
eating 30 different plant products a
week and varying the color as much as
possible
you know managing your stress the
whether it's through meditation or just
like removing the causes of stress if
you're doing and being hydrated
if you are doing all of those things and
you want to play at level two of the
game you could start doing time
restricted eating
so only eating between
ioni between 12 noon and 8 PM but you
could do 8 AM to 8 PM so that kind of
fasting is very beneficial for your
brain as well but only if you've got the
foundations right it's not going to help
you if you don't what does it do for the
brain fasting intermittent fasting um
well it helps to regulate your blood
sugar levels
so you know spiking blood sugar levels
aren't good for your body or your brain
and fasting and calorie restriction they
do have like
brain Health and Longevity benefits but
that you know
only if your foundations are right you
know somebody who's stressed or
eats badly or doesn't sleep enough will
not benefit from time restricted eating
or intermittent fasting
um
because it is a form of stress on your
body but it's a form of stress that your
body can take
and used to build resilience if the
Baseline level of stuff is good and for
neuroplasticity to happen we need to be
taking on
big cognitive challenges challenges that
kind of break existing Pathways yeah so
I want to learn to DJ I've been learning
for about 12 months now
um that feels like a big cognitive
challenge for me yeah that's great
um that's the type of thing that would
establish a new pathway in my brain
absolutely someone's just looking to
build their self-esteem and their
confidence what does the brain tell us
about the process of doing that is it is
it does it go back again to what we said
about awareness about understanding the
feelings and the consequences and about
setting goals and repetition and
accountability
it will get to that but there's actually
a little bit of a jump start to that
which is really helpful particularly in
terms of confidence and self-esteem
which is that usually there's a
particular recurring negative thought
that's associated with feelings of lack
of confidence
um so if you can identify what that is
and
create a positive affirmation that's
like the opposite of it or something
that counteracts it then that can be a
great way to get started my phrase would
have been it has to be perfect and it's
not going to be perfect
I wouldn't have been able to say this
last year but now I would I would
probably be able to say it is going to
be better than perfect it is going to be
amazing like I know it
um but to get myself there I could have
said
it doesn't have to be perfect but it's
going to be great or I could have said
maybe it will be perfect sometimes a
question I ask myself is what's the best
possible outcome that could happen here
so it's changing your language in your
mind about the things that you think so
that's basically
metacognition which is that you can you
you can understand your own thinking and
then
reversing that narrative quite strongly
even if it doesn't feel like it's
totally true and just repeating that so
much that you start to wear down that
other pathway does language really
matter the language we say to ourselves
yeah yeah it really matters yeah how we
speak about ourselves how do we know
that matters I mean it's neuroplasticity
if you're repeating something in your
mind or out loud
then if that's being repeated more than
another statement it's the one that your
brain's going to believe
so we can trick our brains effectively
by saying something else to ourselves
repeatedly because there's this whole
movement in you know the personal
development Community which says you
just kind of look in the mirror and you
say to yourself like I'm beautiful I'm
attractive everyone's gonna love me I'm
going to be rich
and I thought I've found it hard to get
on board with that train yeah
that one because I know I'm bullshitting
myself
in my like subconscious or whatever I
just know if I said those things I'm not
saying about myself but yeah yeah saying
this very very far away things I just
think my brain is smart enough to know
that I'm bullshitting myself yeah I
think there's an element of reality to
it so so there's a few things there
which is those particular things that
you said are very shallow
they are not really the things that
people should you know need to be saying
to themselves
um
what I find
and I picked this up from a podcast with
Lewis is he said that sometimes he would
just say to himself I'm safe I'm safe
I'm okay and actually just sometimes
saying to myself I'm safe is that's what
I need to hear not I'm beautiful and I'm
amazing that that does feel like
a it's kind of thing that everybody
probably wants to say B
it's not addressing the underlying issue
yeah it's not addressing and I'm going
to be rich I mean that's the worst one
because you actually have to do stuff to
make that happen you know you can't just
say that so I think finding the stuff
that you need to say to yourself that is
not to do with social expectation or
parental expectation or you know social
group
um what everybody else is doing like
what you really want to know for
yourself that's going to set you up to
be able to go out into the real world
and do the stuff that you need to do to
get the other things that you want
there you said you can't just say it you
have to go out and do it now when people
hear this term manifestation
it's highly associated with just kind of
saying stuff or thinking stuff and it's
less associated with actually going out
and doing it so yeah a lot of people
just turn off when someone talks about
manifestation because it sounds kind of
woo-woo put it on the vision board and
it will happen and in fact I think I've
said this a few times but I had um I
wouldn't say it was an argument but a
disagreement which resulted in the
person I was speaking to literally
getting out of a taxi in the middle of
New York City and walking off I was on a
date many years ago and the girl was
saying to me that she goes you can just
manifest anything in your life so you
can just think about it and then it will
happen so I was like you think you could
just like think about becoming a
millionaire and then it will happen and
she goes yeah and I go and you wouldn't
even have to like
do all the stuff and she was like no you
could just like think about it and the
universe will Attract it into your life
do you believe in manifestation
and if so what form of manifestation and
how is that supported with neuroscience
so I believe in manifestation based on
your brain so your thoughts your beliefs
your actions so where I've called my
book The Source I have said your brain
is the source of you being able to
attract everything that you want into
your life
so I sat down one summer and I like
researched the laws of attraction and
and just looked at whether I could
explain them through cognitive science
which is Psychology and Neuroscience and
I could
so I was kind of like oh I'm on to
something here and the first stage for
me was
understanding that it is absolutely to
do with the way that you think but then
it's not magically like attracting
something in the atmosphere it's to do
with the changes that you make based on
your thought process
I do but I do believe in vision boards
but I call them action boards because I
see them as a representation of what I
want but I still have to go out there
and make those things happen
I think it's also much more empowering
to believe that it's your brain that's
making that stuff happen and not some
external
force that you're not really sure what
it is so how would I manifest something
into my life say I want to manifest a
great relationship I'm in a great
relationship but say I was single and I
wanted to manifest the perfect partner
how would I manifest the perfect partner
into my life using the brain as the
source yeah so with that one I I think
the preferred method is to create a list
of the attributes that you want in that
person
but you then have to make sure that you
are everything that is on that list oh
so if I want a blonde I've got dye my
hair no I'm joking I'm joking
um okay I get what you mean so you're
talking about fundamental qualities and
values yeah and then making sure that
you represent those qualities and values
that's I've never heard anyone say that
but that is so important because
I know so many people who would write a
list that they couldn't meet themselves
in terms of fundamental values they'd
probably want their partner to be
disciplined to care about their health
to be honest
and if they ask themselves are those are
they those things they'd probably fail
at that to be fair my partner is so much
better than me in so many ways nearly
everywhere
um I'd probably fail at that list too
why is that important
I think that you you hear a lot of
people saying this is what I really want
in someone but you never really hear
people saying I've really worked on
myself and this is what I believe I have
to offer
and so psychologically
you you meet people at the level of
psychological Evolution that you're at
but equally on the sort of flip side of
the coin you meet people at the level of
psychological wound that you have so to
be in a balanced relationship
with someone that's really great
if you've got to be bringing something
to the party I mean no one's going to go
out with you if they're really amazing
and you're a drag but drugs want amazing
people this is the problem right
that's true right I guess so are you
scared to say it like when I was a when
I was at optimal drag in my life when I
was the most a drag in my life I
attracted drag people but I wanted
amazing people and I could never get
them yeah but I feel like with you that
was part of your journey of
knowing that you could become an amazing
person
yeah exactly so you got an amazing
person once you did the work that took
you out of draxville Amen okay so that's
super interesting so make sure you are
the things on that list because we'll
rise to the level of our
um our values and we'll fall to the
level of our wounds
yeah I love the way you put that but
also that
you know what you have to offer in a
relationship is just as important as
what you want out of it and I don't know
as a society we just don't really seem
to think about it like that there's
actually a note in my diary where I
wrote
people who focus on what they want don't
typically get what they want people who
focus on what they have to offer
typically get what they want that's
amazing that's like basically the same
thing yeah she just parroted off you
plagiarized it no but it is in my diary
and I post it on Instagram story a while
ago that it was just an observation to
me in business when you hire people the
people that are focused on like can I
get a pay raise can I get a pay rise
don't typically get the pay rise but the
people that focus on what they have to
offer yeah they're the ones that you you
give all the you promote and you give
the payrolls to because they're focusing
on the most important thing which is I
think over prolonged periods of time not
always in the short term
and not always in every case but life
will eventually give you roughly what
you deserve over a long term generally
for most people not always yeah because
it's going to be someone that says yeah
yeah so you can't what about me because
I've presented the caveat but generally
that's what I've observed and I've seen
people cheat the system I've seen people
get it a little bit further ahead than
their talent or their value but life has
a wonderful way of bringing us back to
the level of our values and you said it
in relationships life will drop you to
the depth of your wounds or to the
height of your values so really if you
want to
find a sustainable way to get what you
want in life is to do that work on what
you can offer other people yeah
I think it made me think that actually
if that let's constantly like oh you
know I want I want this payer eyes I
want that man that's got to be a
cortisol-inducing state in your body but
if instead of that I'm like what can I
do for Stephen
um I have so much love to give that's
going to be oxytocin and who's someone
going to be more attracted to
interesting
oh that's so true one of the things I
want to talk to you about that has been
risen in culture recently is
neurodivergence
big topic
autism ADHD
um so much that I had a mother send me a
voice note the other day her child has
just been
um
diagnosed with autism and she's really
struggling with it and trying to
understand uh what it means and where it
came from and was it hereditary and
there's so many guests on my podcast
have talked about the rise in diagnosis
of ADHD and
um is it something that we are
causing by the way that we choose to
live our lives when you and from an
understanding of Neuroscience what is
neurodiversity and what are causing it
and what is curing it
yeah so this would come more from my
experience as a psychiatrist when I did
do some work with children as well
um
so neurodiversity is basically anything
that doesn't fall into the
category of a typical brain so you know
the way that most of the population
think and how their brain works so that
would include things like dyslexia and
dyscalculia and ADD ADHD
and autism slash Asperger's spectrum and
other things
um
I think that a lot of it is to do with
better diagnosis so
I'm not saying it isn't that it isn't
the case that these things have risen
but I think we're also much better at
diagnosing them so for example when I
worked with mostly little boys with ADHD
when I saw them for the first time and I
took the full family history there was
quite often an absent father who'd
actually been in like several different
relationships and like couldn't hold
down a job and you kind of thought yeah
he probably had it but was undiagnosed
so there is an element of that I do
think that it is an adaptation to the
world which is changing at such a rapid
pace which is you know always switched
on so much technology and some people
would say that autism is even like a
form of evolution in a way to like help
us
keep up with the changing pace of the
world
so you don't necessarily think we know
if it's increasing in prevalence
I think it is but it's partly naturally
increasing and partly because we're
better at diagnosing it
I do Wonder as well sometimes things
like dyslexia whether
humans have always had an element of
Dyslexia
um but it's more
it's more obvious and more of a
more of a challenge in the world we live
in
um think about the schooling system and
writing and education is a fairly new
constructs yeah yeah exactly and so this
isn't to do with neurodivergence but to
do with things like gender identity and
sexual orientation what I found in my
research with the um indigenous wisdom
is that those things were understood
long ago there was a place for people
and an understanding of
you know that their role in in society
and sometimes even an elevated role
so it's really interesting that we're
grappling with things now like you know
what gender does your child want to be
and what life you know is your child
going to have if they're gay or whatever
and like apparently these these ancient
cultures were dealing with this like
all the time no problem your second
series of your podcast is going to focus
on some of this work that you learn yeah
what are some of the interesting things
that if you could only tell me a few
that you think would have the most
significant impact on my life and you
can't mention learning Portuguese
um what would you tell me about
um so one theme that's come through
quite strongly is related to creativity
which was kind of mentioned but that
doing things like humming and chanting
are actually like really beneficial
um and they've obviously been around
forever and we don't really know why
people did them in the first place but
in terms of expressing creativity and
like calming down the nervous system
that's one thing that seems to have come
through from kind of like ayurveda but
also from the first Americans as well
was good for your health and immune
system I think he said yeah
like through your nose hmm
there's different you know there's
different times you can do
um even just like
um go on I can see it
you're avoiding it
I'll be in the trailer
it's also humming like at the back of
your throat
humming like between your lips so like
oh it's such basic stuff I mean you can
do that on the tube you know you can do
it
that's going in the drain no it's not
why would that help
why would that help us I don't really
actually like know the answer I mean
just pick I'm just thinking of this like
what can we get from indigenous wisdom
that could help us now but I guess it's
something to do with regulating your
parasympathetic nervous system okay
yeah yeah
I'm aging generally longevity and aging
one of the really interesting things you
talk about in the book is this idea of
sort of psychological priming and
psychological priming of Aging
and that psychological priming is the
effect that the mindset of Aging has on
our physical body how our thoughts about
aging affect our physical abilities what
I interpreted from that is our thoughts
about aging
have an impact on our aging
yeah so actually there's a really
fascinating study it's one of my
favorite ones to talk about which was
um three groups of octogenarians
people in their 80s okay and one group
was the control group so they just lived
like normal for a week
one group
um had to reminisce about being in their
60s for most of the week whenever they
had an opportunity to
and one group were actually driven to
retrofitted versions of their homes
that looked like what their house looked
like 20 years ago
they were given newspapers dated from 20
years ago
they had photos of themselves in that
house when they were in their 60s
and and one of the things was they got
there and they were they were sort of
like okay you know who's going to carry
our suitcase up to the bedroom or
whatever and they were like no you're 60
now you carry your own suitcase so it
literally started from the minute they
got there and these little old ladies
had to
and and gentlemen had to carry their
cases up
um after one week
the people in that group
were taller
because their their posture improved
they were they had better
musculoskeletal coordination than they
had a week before
in before and after photos that were
shown to people that didn't know them
they were rated as younger in the one
week after photos and the
photos from arriving at that place
um
and the reminiscing group also had some
improvements but not as much as a group
that lived like they were in their 60s
and so there was three groups yeah the
ones that went back and relived their
life the ones that reminisced and the
ones that did nothing at all yeah wow
and that really goes to show the impact
of
what we think about ourselves and then
all of the physiological consequences of
that you you talk about this um your
eyes as well
but you were going to get was it like
laser eye surgery no no it's just like
people told you you needed glasses well
my optician told me so he's um
of Indian origin the same age as me and
he said oh I think you know you're
probably going to need reading glasses
next year and I was like no I do not
want reading glasses that makes you look
really old and he was like yeah I know I
know we both look younger than we are
but you know your eyes are gonna age
just like anybody else's and I was like
no they are not so I left came back a
year later he said oh how's it going
with the reading so it's fine
he sort of went okay Tara so he's doing
my eye test
spins around on his little chair halfway
through and says
your eyes haven't got worse they haven't
even stayed the same they've got better
and I said I know and he said what have
you been doing and I said well I just
said no to you and you said I'm gonna
have to get reading glasses and when I'm
like looking at my phone or a book and
it feels like it would be a bit easier
if I moved it further away I just don't
what's that doing in the brain why is
that why did that improve your reading
um
well I hadn't experienced a problem with
my reading but he was obviously seeing
the numbers slightly change
um I really didn't do much more than
what I've just said so it was like not
accepting the limitation and then not
changing my behavior and I think that's
what you see from the third group of
people which is that
they they had to change their behavior
to to live like
without any help and in a way that they
had to when they were younger so that
essentially removed the limitations that
we impose on ourselves which is that if
I'm X age it must mean that I need
reading glasses or I need a walking
stick or whatever it is
there's a kind of opposite experiment to
that too which was done with
um young medical students in Florida
and they had to walk between five rooms
and on the table were five pieces of
paper with a word on it and you had to
string a sentence out of it
and but that wasn't the real experiment
they thought that was the experiment the
real experiment was that in one of the
rooms the words that were on the table
were Florida beach Sunshine walk
bungalow
and all of them walked more slowly out
of that room than any of the other rooms
because those words are associated with
retirement
and that made them slow down that you
asked me is language important in art to
our brain that's how important it is
so just saying words can change our
Behavior so quickly
that's what the experiment showed I've
been thinking a lot you know I said I've
got this Vlog on YouTube called behind
the diary and in two of the episodes
um I've caught myself out while I'm
filming because I said words that I
thought would be unhelpful and I think
people someone in the comments actually
challenged me because there's one day
when I'm filming Dragons Den and I'm
filming myself I'm just talking about
what's going on I go oh I really need a
coffee this morning and I stop myself
and say I shouldn't say need and then I
go there's something about this casual
use of the word need throughout our
lives that is disempowering me it's
making me a slave to the coffee so I
make this point which I'm sure people
think I'm a little bit bit weird for
making that I should I really need to
not say the word need Associated to the
things because I will then probably
develop a psychological
um and maybe a phys like a someone of a
physical need for that for that thing
and it just it's it's also just bringing
that word need need into your life like
you don't have enough like that you need
something
um I'm constantly changing my words like
you know tweaking them like that so
I would say oh I'm going to treat myself
to a coffee and that was your decision
you were powerful there yeah that's a
choice you made yeah there's an
overarching Point here about personal
responsibility as well when people talk
about
um I can't exercise
um I don't have any time it feels like a
really disempowering
frame versus
I've got other priorities
which feels empowering and I think about
this all the time because if you ask
someone why they don't exercise they'll
typically blame on some Force
the frame makes it seem like there's a
force that's controlling their life for
them that has not given them the time or
that they could not whereas really it's
just a typically a case of priorities
and your your child or your your
job that pays your mortgage can be your
priority but I think it's important I've
always felt it's important to
acknowledge the fact that
you made the choice
to take care of your child or to go to
your mortgage paying job versus I didn't
you know I didn't have any time yeah
this is what I think about language so
much and the language that I use and how
that's dominating my life even
constantly telling myself that I'm
unorganized like messy so
how that's probably making the MSC
person
what have we talked about that that we
probably should have talked about is
there anything at all any studies or any
insights into the brain and how we
change habits that are stubborn
um or anything else at all that you've
learned from the ancient wisdom
the you know I know that we've talked
like very broadly on lots of different
things but I hope that with for me my
intention with every sentence that I've
said to you
is that people should realize how much
potential they have in their brains like
how capable they are of having
an even more amazing life than they have
already
I think I accept that now more than I
ever have before because I've had this
conversation with you I think I accept
that there's so much untapped potential
in me and I'm not this kind of fully
formed
um rigid lump of cells I can change
fundamentally
um I think a lot of people probably are
if they've gotten to this point in the
conversation will also accept that
if you were to close with
I guess the step one like the the thing
that I should immediately do as I move
forward in my life from here that would
help me to start moving towards that
person that I want to become
the
organized great partner
successful in his business great with
his podcast all of those things
what is that first step and you know
what's funny is because my brain keeps
thinking about the taxi driver that's
I'm on the way here who said he'd listen
to the podcast and he told gave me a
little bit of a window into his world so
he's driving the cab every day and I
meet a lot of cab drivers that listen to
the podcast and we chat and oftentimes
they sometimes they have dreams of doing
other things so they might say to me
John I want to start my own business one
day
and I'm just looking
I'm looking for the first couple of
steps but I I reflect on what you said
and go they're going to be so hard wired
into their patterns and their jobs and
their habits and their routines and it's
very hard to make that jump yeah
so if I could give people a takeaway to
start with that's really simple but it
doesn't mean there isn't a lot of hard
work at the other end of it it would be
be very clear on what it is that you
want
so you've mentioned a few things
spend five minutes sitting down and
visualizing those things being true
and then give gratitude for that
that would be my first step
give gratitude for those things being
true
just five minutes I'm a great partner
I'm not messy my podcast is super
successful
like see it feel it in your body taste
it in your mouth
hear it in your ears
completely immerse yourself in that for
five minutes longer if you can
and then just
be so grateful for all of that
essentially what you're doing is moving
your brain from a fear state to a trust
State and that is the gateway to making
these changes
thank you so much thank you really a
thought-provoking wonderful conversation
and I've learned so much and you've
given me so much food for thought um and
you've changed my mind on a lot of
things in my life that's a great
compliment you know and I've I know a
few things about neuroplasticity because
I've had guests here that have spoken to
me about it but I have a better
understanding of it now and I also
understand I think most importantly
the part of manifestation that is
understandable through the lens of
science yeah I guess
we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're going to leave it for oh
this question
is
what could you choose to change
and choose to feel great about
the same thing that's that's the
question question says what could you
choose to change and choose to feel
great about
um
I assume it's the same thing
I could finally realize my dream of
feeling like I am truly a creative
person
and
I'm not exactly sure that would look how
that would look yet but I'm on the path
to it so I think getting clearer on that
um would feel great and actually doing
it would also feel great
you're already a creative person though
thank you so much for saying that I feel
like I have one more step to go before I
really feel that I've done that because
that was such a
a deep seated thing for me I mean
there's a bit more of a backstory to it
which I didn't give you but my English
teacher said to me you are so good at
drama
you should read English Oxford and go to
Radha
and I came home and told my parents and
they literally said oh my dad said Over
My Dead Body
you'll go to medical school and then
after that you can do whatever you want
and so
I think there is that frustration in
there that's been in there for a long
time like these days you can't imagine
anything better than your kid coming
home and one of the teachers having
picked them out is exceptional
um
but of course at that time there were no
brown people on TV so it was seen as an
even bigger risk than than it would be
now and I have to say you know every
time I see
someone that looks like me who's like
made it as an actress I just it makes me
so happy
um
so
why did your father say that
I think that Indian parents you know
they they think that stability is the
key to happiness for their children so
having a stable career
having a regular salary I don't really
come from a family of entrepreneurs
which is why it was so crazy when I gave
up my job and started up a business no
one could understand it
um and I was afraid of not having a
regular paycheck
and then at some point I realized
I could earn zero in any one month but I
could also well you know I could there's
a there's no limit to what I could earn
and I think this realization came when
in one month I invoiced what I was
earning in a year as a doctor
didn't they think you were your
grandmother reincarnated
and she grew up in a village in India
and didn't have access to education and
that was a big regret of hers
so I was given you know the best
education that money could buy
got an MD and a PhD it's like it's over
compensation and it wasn't really
necessarily what I ever wanted
thank you so much giving me so much to
think about what a wonderful
conversation what a wonderful ray of
sunshine and like you are in the world
I'm so excited to see your your career
continue to evolve and touch and help so
many one people
um all of your work is incredible you've
got your podcast coming up as well which
I think everyone's going to be super
excited to hear about because if it's
anything like this conversation it's
going to be of tremendous tremendous
value
um when is that when is that going to be
out it's launching on October 4th but
season one is already available to
Listen to If people haven't
listen to it already reinvent yourself
with Dr Tara yeah
which is the second season which is in
that second season you're aiming to do a
lot of the ancient wisdom yeah stuff so
exciting really excited to hear that so
October 4th we'll look out for that
thank you so much for your time
um thank you
Dr Tara
swart
there's actually the word art in your
name
but there is have you ever noticed that
no
okay well I'm excited for our next
conversation and to hear about how
you've pursued that creativity because
it's certainly within you
um and it's such a wonderful honor to
have met you today and to learn from you
thank you so much thank you
[Music]
oh